## What is this ?

This is a [MuseScore](https://handbook.musescore.org/) [plugin](https://musescore.org/en/plugins) which adds or removes capo chords to a score.

MuseScore's built-in capo option puts the capo chords in parentheses to the right of the original chords. However:
- Most published music puts capo chords in parentheses ABOVE the main chord.
- If the chords get at all complex (F#maj7/C#) there isn't room for MuseScore's layout and some chords get squeezed upwards.

Capo-stacker read the chords in a score and inserts capo chords in parentheses above the original chords. It also inserts staff-text like "Capo: 3" before the first chord.

MuseScore's capo chords are display-time: they don't affect the saved score file except for the capo position saved in the Format settings. If you change a chord, the MuseScore capo chord will automatically update.

The capo chords generated by Capo-stacker are stored in the score file. If you change a chord, you will need to either change the capo chord manually, or run Capo-stacker again. Thus, Capo-stacker should usually be run when a score is nearly complete.

When using Capo-stacker, MuseScore's capo setting should be 0, or MuseScore will show spurious capoed versions of Capo-stacker's chords.

## Installation

Current and previous versions are available for download from [website](https://github.com/OldBaldGeek/MuseScore-goodies/capo-stacker).

Unpack the zip file. Move the `capo-stacker` folder to MuseScore's plugins folder. This is configurable at `Preferences:General:Folders`. The default directories are:
- `Windows: C:\Users\%USERNAME%\Documents\MuseScore4\Plugins`
- `macOS: ~/Documents/MuseScore4/Plugins`
- `Linux: ~/Documents/MuseScore4/Plugins`

Click ``Home: Plugins or Plugins: Manage plugins...`` and `Enable` the plugin.

To update to a new version, simply replace the `capo-stacker` folder with the new one (you may need to restart Musescore).

## Operation

The dialog has several controls:

- `Staff with chords`: drop-list to select the staff whose chords are to be processed. In a typical lead sheet or vocal-plus-piano arrangement, this will be staff 1.
   If the chords are on a different staff, capo-stacker may still see them on staff one. I haven't looked into this, as it doesn't affect my usage.

- `Capo fret`: drop-list to select the capo position. Select `none (remove)` to remove capo chords.

- `Capo label X offset`: this specifies an offset from the first chord at which to insert staff-text showing `Capo: x` The default value of -12 will usually be fine.

- `Capo label Y offset`" this specifies an offset from the original chords at which to insert staff-text and the capo chords. The default value of -5 will usually be fine. If this value is less negative, the capo chords may show at different heights.

- `Apply`: Click this to delete any existing capo chords, and insert new ones according to the value of `Capo fret`

- `Close`: Click this to close the dialog.

- `Show Info`: this is a debug item that shows the positions of the chords. It may prove useful in adjusting the capo offset values.

## Notes and Limitations

Because of enharmonic note and chord spellings, determining the correct translation of a chord isn't as easy as you might think: is that a C-sharp or a D-flat?
This version of Capo-stacker punts: it has a table filled in with information cribbed from MuseScore's capo chords for a test file. In limited tests thus far, it seems to cope with the key signatures, chords, and guitarists that I encounter: no more than four sharps or flats in the original key, and guitarists who want to capo into C, G, D, or A.

I have been thinking about other ways to do the translation. If you know the secret, please let me know.
